Welcome to Slash Forward. In this episode we’re
going to explore man’s hubris via the Roger
Corman-produced environmentalist cautionary tale,
Piranha. When a couple of youngsters go missing in
the wilderness of the Pacific Northwest, Maggie
is hired to try to track down their whereabouts.
But with a vast wilderness in front of her, she is
forced to rely on the expertise of local bushman
Paul Grogan, a true American badass. As they
get closer and closer to discovering the truth,
they run into more and more resistance from the
local military outpost to keep the potential
environmental fallout under wraps. However, with
a waterborne menace making its way down river and
potentially emptying into the ocean, the unlikely
pair find themselves in a race to warn and save
as many people as possible from the terrifying
and painful natural process of being converted
into fish poop. Aside from the environmental
aspects, this movie also speaks strongly to the
value in ensuring governmental leaders divest
themselves of private business interests. Feel
free to chew on that topic and discuss it in
the comments below. And, while you’re here,
check out some of my other videos - this
one would pair nicely with The Prophecy
or The Host, a duo of water-monster-based films
with environmental undertones. Let’s get to it.
We open on a quaint and serene wilderness where
Barb and David make their way through the foliage,
looking for a prime spot to bed down for the
night. They arrive at a sign of warning that
they treat as an encouragement, as it clearly
indicates that something cool lies yonder. Sure
enough, they find some far out industrial ruins.
Despite the almost assured presence of tetanus,
they elect to bathe in the silty waters, which is
sexy AF. After diving in, David immediately feels
a couple of stingy, little nibbles that become
too distracting to continue swimming. And soon,
he is dragged below the blood red water.
Then, as the moon passes behind some clouds,
we learn that ignoring warning signs
is not groovy, not groovy a’tall.
We then transition to the plane station where
Maggie is enjoying the video arcade as her final
rental car arrangements are made. As she’s seen
off, we learn that she’s heading to Indian Springs
and that she’s been hired to find something,
but we don’t need to know what quite yet.
Then we move on to big Paul Grogan, receiving
his delivery of party materials from Jack.
The cost? However much he can peel
off before Jack says stop. You see,
‘ole Jack doesn’t need much in this life. And
what he does need is provided by the great
river - she bathes him, nourishes him with
her fish, swaddles him in her watery bosom
and even rocks him to sleep at night. Yep,
Jack’s living a life of simple contentment.
Then we catch up with Maggie in a Jeep
that there’s no way she rented from Hertz.
After some engine troubles she finds herself
at the doorstep of rustic Paul Grogan.
Despite the lack of invitation, she
immediately notifies him that she’s a
skip-tracer and has traveled up to his
hovel to look for some missing teens.
But Paul’s used to being alone, other than his
daughter, and he’s not much for conversation.
He points her in the direction of Jack’s cabin,
or the old, abandoned military facility up river.
Being a woodland noob, she insists he show
her the way. Her tenacity is unassailable,
which is demonstrated further as she gains entry
to the facility. After a bit of searching and
cold calling, they eventually arrive at the
pool. She finds a locket with Barb’s initials.
Convinced they’re resting at the bottom of the
pool, they look for a way to drain it. They are
surprised to find some warm coffee in this
old, abandoned post. Upon entering the lab,
it becomes apparent there is still some testing
going on, and some of the subjects roam free.
But all this Dr. Moreau shit creeps Paul
out, and he is eager to leave. On the way,
Maggie finds even more evidence that the couple
had been there, and likely still are. Paul balks
at the thought of draining the water sans
permission - and his concerns are confirmed
when Dr. Hoak shows up and starts to choke a
bitch. Luckily, an alarm goes off, taking his
attention and allowing Paul to deliver a firm
hammer fist to the shoulder, inciting a swoon.
As Paul cools his mostly unused knuckles,
he gives them a customary lick and realizes
the water is salty. So good thing they drained it
without any preparation. They do find some bones,
but presume them to be the remains
of a dog, and then hear as Dr. Hoak
takes off in their wheels. But he’s
still woozy from that shoulder injury,
and he flips that sucker. Despite all
this head trauma, they do find him alive.
He wakes up later, lashed to a table, and
insists they’ve unleashed a pox upon the
local wildlife. However, he declines to
elaborate before bedtime. The unlikely
pair try to puzzle out what’s going on
and, in sharing some personal details,
we learn that Paul’s daughter
is away at camp across the lake.
The next morning they confront the complexities
of getting their captive to the police without
a vehicle. They opt to travel to the dam,
which alway has a ranger on duty. Because Paul
wasn’t joking about his commitment to primitive
living, they are forced to travel via river raft.
We then transition to Paul’s daughter, little
Susie, as a counselor tries to work out how to
convince her to overcome her fears of the
water. She’s irrationally afraid of there
being something in the water. Mr. Dumont
doesn’t have time for coddling, though
because there is an upcoming water competition
and he’s pushing for peak performance.
We then check in with Jack, doing
some drinking and some storytelling,
which he barely concludes before
getting mobbed by a gang of things.
Elsewhere, Dr. Hoak wakes up on the raft and
insists they stay away from the water, for
it’s filled with Ooohh, it’s Piranya
- and for no reason in particular,
they choose not to believe him. He did
suffer a multitude of recent head injuries,
but then they float by ‘ole Jack’s
place. After securing the raft,
they stumble upon Jack. We never learn
how they manage their grief, because Paul
immediately transitions to digging a shallow
grave for his old friend, which seems hasty.
At camp, another counselor works to find a way
to help Susie get out of the swimming race.
She ultimately settles on adorning
her with a fake contusion to the knee.
Meanwhile, to pad out the body count, Pa
reaches in to free a net and we observe a
little nibble turn into a full-on frothing frenzy
as the relentless school collects their meal.
Back with the main crew, Hoak reveals that he was
involved in genetically modifying the fish to make
them adaptable and quick to breed so they could
be used as a biological weapon in the Vietnam war.
When the war ended, the military poisoned
the water. But Hoak did too damn good a job,
and some of the stronger ones survived
and proliferated. This story jogs loose
something in Paul’s memory and he
suddenly realizes that every so
often they open the dam a little to even
out the lake. So, catastrophe is imminent.
As they continue on, we learn that Hoak really
has a hang up with the thought that they
may hold him responsible for this fiasco. And
then they run across our friend, little Joshua,
calling out for daddy and hoping not
to sink. Eager for his redemption arc,
Hoak leaps into the water and swims at a
snail’s pace so as to ensure Joshua’s safe
passage to the raft before sinking. He also
ensures that Joshua gets a good, full view
of death before the day is done. They manage to
pull him aboard, but he’s really messed up now.
Continuing further along, they come
to regret declining a burial at sea
as transporting a bloody corpse only attracts
and frenzies the predators, who begin to
loosen the lashes as they attempt to feed. They
jettison the corpse and consolidate the raft,
aiming for shore before it falls apart and
just barely making it. Paul then breaks into
an all out sprint toward the dam as the air horn
sounds - signaling a gratifying release impending.
Luckily for Paul, the ranger is fairly
inept, allowing him to make it just in time.
Upon notification, the military
rolls up with their specialty
meat-bait division. The meat boys quickly find
strong evidence of Piranha activity. Easy solve,
it’s just a matter of overwhelming the river with
poison. Colonel Waxman offers the civilians a job
to try to keep them quiet as the grunts work to
fill the river with a couple of garden hoses.
But Paul knows this river like he knows
the nooks and crannies of his own body,
and he believes there’s an alternate route to the
lake. Dr. Mengers is not concerned about this,
because of how stupid fish are - and
this is despite her familiarity with
Dr. Hoak’s good work. In light of
Paul’s continued protestations,
they learn that their retention
that evening will not be voluntary.
That night, Paul resolves to leave post
haste, and sends Maggie out to employ her
feminine wiles on the guard, which consists
of exposing her tas so they can acquire a Jeep
and roll out. Paul makes a courtesy call to Mr.
Dumont to warn of the danger heading their way.
He doesn’t believe a word of it, but judging by
the late hour, they have plenty of time to get
there. Unfortunately, they zoom too greatly
and get pulled over in their stolen vehicle.
They hope to convince the officer of what’s
going down, but he pulls a dang gun on ‘em.
He circles back with the Colonel,
who confirms the need to hold them
and prevent them from communicating
with the outside world - you know,
justice? So Officer Hickey tells them to cool
out for the night and he leaves for his patrol.
As we find out, the Colonel has a vested
interest in keeping a lid on this thing,
because he happens to be the silent partner in a
business venture poised for a grand opening the
next day. Back at camp, the counselors discuss
how nice it would be to get in a night swim.
You know, just feel free in the water
as it laps up your body. But Mr. Dumont
ruins the mood with his general presence
and disdain for off-hours entertainment.
At the holding cell Maggie opts to
mimic an escape routine she learned
from an old salt she put in jail a
couple of times. She makes it work
and acquires the keys so they can leave
in yet another stolen government vehicle.
Before you know it, it’s the next afternoon
and the grand opening of the new business
pavilion. The festivities wind up, and
they hope to wrangle in some business by
giving everyone a bunch of free shwag. As
the celebration of commercialism unfolds,
the kids line up for their water games. The
little blood-filled meat sacks all go hopping
into the water while Mr. Dumont prepares to
officiate the biggest competition of his life.
Susie uses the commotion to slip
away and hide under a canoe.
Knowing his daughter’s well-being is in jeopardy,
Paul drives it like he stole it and recklessly
flies down the road like a cannonball. The games
do get underway, and the kids frolic about as Mr.
Dumont screams his lungs out while brandishing
a gun. Shortly thereafter the bites begin.
You thought they wouldn’t do it, but sure
enough the kids are getting gnawed up - lending
credence to Susie’s irrational fear of the
water, which has to be encouraging for her.
Of course, now is also when she decides
to grab a soft-bottomed raft and venture
in to rescue her two favorite counselors.
However, her plan only ends up working for
one of them. Paul and Maggie arrive just in
time to observe the bloody aftermath. Maggie
calls the new Aquarena to let them know of the
potential danger that is about to be actualized,
but no dice. They just can’t make the business
case for closing down on grand opening day. So,
Paul shames Mr. Dumont before heading that
way. Despite being a complete stranger to her,
Maggie gives Susie a little shoulder
squeeze and then tags along.
They race there in a similar fashion to before,
with various beach shenanigans in full swing.
The three business partners conspire to continue
to cover up, completely unwilling to accept the
potential risk. But we know what’s coming, and
the first victims are a trio of scuba divers
checking out the various river weeds growing
down below. The aftermath is witnessed by a
hotshot monoskier - whose cries to go in
are unheeded by these rambunctious ladies
who refuse to stop until he proves his
worth to them. But then they do stop, but
he insists they get going again, causing enough
confusion to result in a midriver catastrophe.
The swarm then moves in on the swimmers,
who begin going down left and right as the
already murky waters become filled with chum. Of
course, this begins right as Buck Gardner was on
the horn with the local papers, telling them the
rumors of water danger are completely unfounded.
The patrons rush to get out, but it’s really
quite a nibblerific bloodbath out there,
with people losing little bits of themselves
all over. They continue to run overland,
despite the relative safety from fish. Amidst
the bedlam, the Colonel gets his comeuppance.
Paul and Maggie arrive just in time
to save no one, and go joyriding
in someone’s speedboat - hoping to head
off the swarm at a bottleneck where they
can then smother them in pollution. Paul has
to open the floodgate manually, so he ropes up
and gives instructions to count to 100 before
tugging him out. Once it gets past that time,
he’s pretty much dead regardless of
whether the Piranha get him or not.
He makes his way into the underwater
office and reaches the wheel just in time.
Those little suckers get to pickin at him,
but he focuses in good and hard and opens
the pipes right as Maggie hits 100. She then
jet boats his lilly white ass out of there,
leaving the Piranha behind to choke on it.
Back at the resort, the courtyard looks
like a medic’s tent from World War II,
except there’s children lying about
as well. Susie faithfully delivers
her old pop some of his daddy juice to revive him,
while Dr. Mengers gets back on her bullshit
- proclaiming there’s no way the swarm could
have survived the blast of pollution or reached
the ocean. But the end title implies otherwise.
Originally created to suckle off that
Jaws clout, Piranha actually ended up
being a reasonably well-done movie. It
has a nice mixture of humor elements and
was conservative enough in its effects that Joe
Dante, who eventually went on to direct Gremlins,
didn’t have to skimp out on the scenes of
destruction, which were plentiful and expansive.
They originally intended to have Rick Baker do the
effects, but he recommended they get in touch with
Rob Bottin, who eventually went on to do the
effects work for John Carpenter’s The Thing.
Basically, the movie borrows a strong premise
from a huge blockbuster, and then is put
together by a group of first-timers who would
eventually go on to create massive hits. So,
despite any underlying issues or
weaknesses, the movie can’t help
but to entertain and be of a generally higher
quality than it really has any right to be.
Before we go, I’d like to give a huge thanks to
my donors, memorialized in the hall of headshots.
I have a website set up where you
can support the channel through
donations or merch. Any donation unlocks
uncensored movie reviews of Lifeforce,
Under the Skin and Possessor, with others to
be added over time. If you enjoyed the video,
I’d love for you to become a part of the
channel by subscribing. Thanks for watching.